Image correlation method for DNA sequence alignment.

The complexity of searches and the volume of genomic data make sequence alignment
one of bioinformatics most active research areas. New alignment approaches have
incorporated digital signal processing techniques. Among these, correlation
methods are highly sensitive. This paper proposes a novel sequence alignment
method based on 2-dimensional images, where each nucleic acid base is represented
as a fixed gray intensity pixel. Query and known database sequences are coded to 
their pixel representation and sequence alignment is handled as object
recognition in a scene problem. Query and database become object and scene,
respectively. An image correlation process is carried out in order to search for 
the best match between them. Given that this procedure can be implemented in an
optical correlator, the correlation could eventually be accomplished at light
speed. This paper shows an initial research stage where results were "digitally" 
obtained by simulating an optical correlation of DNA sequences represented as
images. A total of 303 queries (variable lengths from 50 to 4500 base pairs) and 
100 scenes represented by 100 x 100 images each (in total, one million base pair 
database) were considered for the image correlation analysis. The results showed 
that correlations reached very high sensitivity (99.01%), specificity (98.99%)
and outperformed BLAST when mutation numbers increased. However, digital
correlation processes were hundred times slower than BLAST. We are currently
starting an initiative to evaluate the correlation speed process of a real
experimental optical correlator. By doing this, we expect to fully exploit
optical correlation light properties. As the optical correlator works jointly
with the computer, digital algorithms should also be optimized. The results
presented in this paper are encouraging and support the study of image
correlation methods on sequence alignment.