Multi-objective pairwise RNA sequence alignment.

MOTIVATION: With an increase in the number of known biological functions of
non-coding RNAs, the importance of RNA sequence alignment has risen. RNA sequence
alignment problem has been investigated by many researchers as a mono-objective
optimization problem where contributions from sequence similarity and secondary
structure are taken into account through a single objective function. Since there
is a trade-off between these two objective functions, usually we cannot obtain a 
single solution that has both the best sequence similarity score and the best
structure score simultaneously. Multi-objective optimization is a widely used
framework for the optimization problems with conflicting objective functions. So 
far, no one has examined how good alignments we can obtain by applying
multi-objective optimization to structural RNA sequence alignment problem.
RESULTS: We developed a pairwise RNA sequence alignment program, Cofolga2mo,
based on multi-objective genetic algorithm (MOGA). We tested Cofolga2mo with a
benchmark dataset which includes sequence pairs with a wide range of sequence
identity, and we obtained at most 100 alignments for each inputted RNA sequence
pair as an approximate set of weak Pareto optimal solutions. We found that the
alignments in the approximate set give benchmark results comparable to those
obtained by the state-of-the-art mono-objective RNA alignment algorithms.
Moreover, we found that our algorithm is efficient in both time and memory usage 
compared to the other methods.
AVAILABILITY: Our MOGA programs for structural RNA sequence alignment can be
downloaded at http://rna.eit.hirosaki-u.ac.jp/cofolga2mo/.