Vertical decomposition with Genetic Algorithm for Multiple Sequence Alignment.

BACKGROUND: Many Bioinformatics studies begin with a multiple sequence alignment 
as the foundation for their research. This is because multiple sequence alignment
can be a useful technique for studying molecular evolution and analyzing sequence
structure relationships.
RESULTS: In this paper, we have proposed a Vertical Decomposition with Genetic
Algorithm (VDGA) for Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA). In VDGA, we divide the
sequences vertically into two or more subsequences, and then solve them
individually using a guide tree approach. Finally, we combine all the
subsequences to generate a new multiple sequence alignment. This technique is
applied on the solutions of the initial generation and of each child generation
within VDGA. We have used two mechanisms to generate an initial population in
this research: the first mechanism is to generate guide trees with randomly
selected sequences and the second is shuffling the sequences inside such trees.
Two different genetic operators have been implemented with VDGA. To test the
performance of our algorithm, we have compared it with existing well-known
methods, namely PRRP, CLUSTALX, DIALIGN, HMMT, SB_PIMA, ML_PIMA, MULTALIGN, and
PILEUP8, and also other methods, based on Genetic Algorithms (GA), such as SAGA, 
MSA-GA and RBT-GA, by solving a number of benchmark datasets from BAliBase 2.0.
CONCLUSIONS: The experimental results showed that the VDGA with three vertical
divisions was the most successful variant for most of the test cases in
comparison to other divisions considered with VDGA. The experimental results also
confirmed that VDGA outperformed the other methods considered in this research.